Okay. Welcome to Space 5065, lesson
one, part two, The Earth-Sun Relationship.
So why is the space environment important?
Well, up to a quarter of all space failures are due to the space
environment. This is directly from Tribble, but this
is from
the National Center for Environmental Information, was their original
reference, and NOAA, the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, which is right here, or
close to us in Boulder, Colorado.
These are some of the orbit categories, which you're
probably familiar with. But just in case, we have LEO, MEO, and GEO.
LEO is where the ISS is, Starlink, reconnaissance
satellites.
We'll consider that roughly less than about 1,000 kilometers, where
drag is a major effect. Medium Earth orbit is where
GPS is, 1,000 to 35,000
kilometers. That's also Molniya orbits, which you
probably learned about in orbital mechanics, as well
as some communication satellites.
And then GEO is communication,
TV, advanced UHF, about
36,000 kilometers. And you
hover over the same spot of the Earth if you are
over the equator.
If you're tilted,
the ground track forms a figure eight, and you can also form circular ground
tracks from that.
So first off, we need to understand the basics of space flight.
These are some important individuals.
You might recognize Newton.
Kepler.
Might not recognize the gentleman on the left. This is Tycho Brahe.
And they were all instrumental in learning and
passing along their knowledge
about future space
travel and spacecraft. Which we rely heavily on their
theories to do what we do now.
Aristotle started it all. Well, probably way before then.
Humans have always been looking up at the stars and wondering about them.
But Aristotle, 384 to 332 BC
in Greece, had a geocentric model of the
solar system. He was the first to do that.
Or
that was the state of the art at that time,
saying that the Earth was the center of the solar system.
There were two realms, the terrestrial, which consisted of the Earth, Moon, and
sub-lunar region.
And the celestial, or above the Moon.
The sub-lunar region stood for change and
imperfection, and the celestial region above the Moon
stood for complete order and perfection.
Of course, Copernicus came along and his parents,
when he was a teenager said, "Son, the universe doesn't rotate
around you."
Got him thinking,
and he was the first to come up with a
Sun-centered
universe.
But everything still traveled in circles.
Many years later, Tycho
Brahe came along,
and he was working with Kepler, but he was making a lot of
observations about our planets.
And it turned out that Mars' orbit
was off by one minute of arc or one over
3,600
portions of a
degree.
And that was very unique, or that was very
interesting because Mars happens to have one of the most eccentric orbits
of all of the planets in our solar system.
He was an interesting individual. I showed the picture.
You've probably heard of this story.
He lost his nose in a duel.
And
he died at a king's banquet, after a king's
banquet,
because apparently, it's not polite to get up and excuse yourself at
the king's table. His bladder burst, and he died
three days later. But he was the first to determine that there
was a problem with the circular orbit model of
our solar system.
It was Kepler that figured out why.
And these are three of Kepler's
laws, or his three laws. The orbits of planets are ellipses
with the Sun at one focus. So he was the first one to actually
state that orbits aren't circular.
Second, the line joining a planet to the Sun sweeps out equal areas in equal
times. As you can see in the figure there to the
right.
You're going faster at perigee. This would be perigee or
periapsis since this is around the Sun.
And this would be apoapsis.
And of course, around the Earth, that's called perigee and apogee.
And then finally, the square of an orbit's period is proportional through the cube
of the average distance between the planet
and the central body. And that turns out to be our
famous period equation that you learned about in orbital
mechanics
So next we're going to go into Newton, Newton's laws, and we're going
to take a look at these laws and its relevance
to space objects. So number one, a body
continues in its state of rest or uniform motion
unless compelled to change that by a force impressed upon it.
The fact that satellites are going around in circles around the
Earth or ellipses or whatever the case may be
says that there is a force on it, and of course that
force is that of gravity.
And we'll talk about Newton's universal law of gravitation in a minute.
So how do you get something in orbit?
Well, it's giving it horizontal velocity.
So let's take a look at Newton's cannon here.
I will have to share this with you.
Okay.
So if we're standing on the top of a huge mountain and fire,
you can see that it goes a little ways, but not very
far. If we crank it up to six
kilometers per second,
it'll go a little way, but still hit the Earth.
So the key here is about 7.2 kilometers per second.
If we can
get something
going horizontal around the Earth, the Earth curves
away from it before it impacts it,
and that is the whole basis of space travel.
You'll notice when something launches, it goes straight up, but it curves
over to give it that horizontal velocity.
If I crank that up even more, I will end up with
a higher elliptical orbit. So at
about 7.2 kilometers per second, we can end up in circular
orbits. Higher than that, we add energy, we're going to be
transitioning to elliptical orbits, and higher than that
parabolic, and larger than that hyperbolic, which allows us to
do interplanetary travel.
So that was Newton's first law.
And that is why giraffes need to wear seat belts,
because of Newton's first law.
Relevance, there must be a force on satellites, gravity, and
momentum is conserved. Orbits are constant in orientation
and size.
Second law, most people say second law, F equals ma.
Well, that is not true. Newton's second law actually says the time
rate of change of an object's momentum is equal to the applied
force. So if we write this out, that would be--
and I'm writing this, this would really be the derivative dp
over dt,
where
this stands for a vector
and p stands for momentum,
which is mass times velocity. So this
says dmv
over dt is equal to the sum of the forces.
And then this goes on to say using the product rule from
calculus, dm over dt
v plus
mv over dt,
which is indeed acceleration. So F equals
ma is only that last term. Where does this term go?
Well, if you assume mass is constant, that term goes away.
However, think about a rocket.
Mass changes rapidly. Think about a satellite.
Mass changes rapidly or can change rapidly if you're
maneuvering. So keep that in mind is that
F equals ma does not normally apply to rockets,
and most of the time doesn't apply to satellites or only
applies to satellites if you're not maneuvering.
So the relevance, you must assume mass is constant if you're going
to use F equals ma.
Why is this important? Well, we're going to use it to
derive the two-body equation of motion, and for
rockets, in fact, the m dot v term is
the thrust term.
Newton's third law obviously equal and opposite reaction
applies directly to rockets.
Newton's universal law of gravitation.
G is a gravitational constant equal to this
value. It was discovered years ago
by Newton, and he came up with this universal law of
gravitation. And the reason he was able to come up with this
is we knew the gravitational acceleration
on the Earth was about 9.81 meters per
second squared. That on the Moon was about
0.00272. That's a factor of one over
3,600ths,
where of course these are measured from the Earth,
which is 60 squared or a distance of
r. Our moon is about 60
times the radius of the surface.
So this is the key to understanding orbital
motion.
Force of gravity is
GM1M2 where this would be
GM Earth Msatellite
over r squared keeping in mind that r is
measured from the center of the Earth.
So how do we get the two-body equation of motion from that?
Well, we're going to simplify this a little bit.
You'll notice this term, GME, is a constant.
It's equal to 398,600.5
kilometers cubed per second squared.
So that gives us this relationship for the force
of gravity.
So now we can take this relationship, sum of
forces is equal to assuming mass is
constant, mass times acceleration, which is the
second derivative of the position vector.
This is a unit vector. A
caret denotes unit vector in this class.
And we set
the force
equal to mu
M satellite over R squared.
It's acting in the negative R direction.
Is equal to M, and that should be M satellite
R double dot.
So we
can cancel the M, so we get R double dot
plus mu over R squared R
hat is equal to zero, which is where that comes
from.
Noting that the unit vector is equal to the
vector divided by the magnitude,
then we get
this expression.
And that can be numerically integrated to
discover that all
orbits are either circular or elliptical, hyperbolic, or
parabolic.
Well, parabolic is not used a lot. The radius of the
Earth, incidentally, and sometimes I will use the Earth
symbol, which is a bullseye, basically, is
6,378 kilometers is what we will
use for this class.
You can numerically integrate to get the position and
velocity, or you can come up with a
geometry approximation,
and
this is the solution to it. Some of these parameters I will go over
shortly, but A is the semi-major axis.
E is eccentricity.
And nu is true anomaly,
which is shown here,
measured from perigee, the line to perigee, to the
position vector.
You will need this equation for homework
problem four.
Let's see. I better define a few of these other parameters.
Semi-major axis is half the distance across the
ellipse.
E
is if this distance is called 2C
between the foci, C over A, which
tells you how out of circular
an
orbit is. So for the ISS, for example,
eccentricity is zero, which means it's circular.
For the planets, E is between one and zero, which means
it's elliptical.
To reach escape velocity, you would have eccentricity equal
to one.
And greater than one is interplanetary or
hyperbolic.
Energy considerations. We know energy is made up mostly
of kinetic and potential energy,
as long as you don't have any losses.
What we define in orbital mechanics is
a specific mechanical energy divided by the mass because the mass is
irrelevant. You're in free fall. So
using a little bit of the parameters that we
discovered earlier, we have our kinetic energy term,
we have our potential energy term, and we know that's equal to a
constant related to the size of the orbit.
And I do not derive that here.
If you took orbital mechanics with me, you would see that
derivation. And you will need this for homework problem five.
PE is defined a little differently
than we're used to seeing it inside the Earth sphere of influence.
PE is-- Whoops, looks like the
lettering here got a little off. Less than zero
at the edge of the Earth sphere of influence, it's equal to zero.
And
outside the Earth sphere of influence, potential energy is zero.
Our overall energy, however, is negative inside the Earth
sphere of influence Zero at the edge of Earth's sphere of
influence, and greater than zero
outside. Which means outside the Earth's sphere of influence,
you have a positive velocity, no potential
energy. That's why the energy is greater than zero.
Inclination.
These are some definitions of the different types of orbit types.
Equatorial, obviously. Polar is at 90 degrees.
Direct orbits.
Prograde moves in the direction of the Earth's rotation.
Indirect or retrograde moves opposite it.
We
mostly use retrograde for sun-synchronous orbits,
seldom going above 110 degrees, except for some
countries that can't launch
eastward,
like Israel, for example.
They use a lot of retrograde orbits because of that.
It is driven by what orbit you can launch
into. The inclination is driven by the latitude of the launch site and the
mission requirements. These are some of just
a few of the launch sites. Of course, we have Eastern
Range, Cape Canaveral, Western Range of Vandenberg,
Wallops.
There are those all over the Earth.
Vandenberg or West Range is usually used to launch
sun-synchronous satellites like this or like
this.
Eastern Range is used to launch
components going to the ISS, such as resupply missions
or
Dragon human
flight
capsule,
and interplanetary missions a lot of times, although we have launched some from the
Western Range.
This is the allowable launch azimuths from
Vandenberg and Kennedy Space Center, just for
your information. This is from Wallops, Virginia.
Okay, so the Earth's magnetic field is
fascinating because it's essentially a dipole field,
but complicated by several things.
First off, the magnetic axes are not
aligned with the geographical axis,
kind of like it's shown here in the picture.
And the sun's magnetic field causes perturbations at altitudes
greater than 2,000 kilometers. So if you're greater than 2,000
kilometers, you have to take into account the sun's magnetic
field along with the Earth's.
Note the North magnetic pole is the south
end of the magnetic pole, or the magnetic
field, and the south pole is the
northern end of the magnetic field.
We're going to do a few definitions here, but a couple of
things to notice before we do that is that the
poles wander independently of one another,
and I'll show you how that works in just a minute.
Terminology. We're going to call V the magnetic
potential of a dipole.
And that is a vector equal to M
dot r over r
cubed, where if I don't have a vector over something, by the way,
that means a magnitude. And that is measured in
Tesla meter cubed,
where r is the distance from the center of the field,
which in our case is Earth's center, Earth's core.
m
is the magnetic moment.
And that is about 8 to the
14th
Tesla
meters cubed. And a Tesla
is a unit
of magnetic flux density.
A Tesla
is a one newton force on a one-meter wire carrying
one amp. So that's just a technical definition of it.
It is used to measure the magnetic flux
density.
B
is the magnetic field intensity
or a measure of the field
strength.
And I will let you look at the text for this derivation,
but it is
approximately equal to m
Over r squared
3 cos squared theta plus
1,
where
theta
is defined as what's called the colat, collateral.
Where if you take the Earth's equator and you move up, that is called the
latitude. So that is the complement of
the latitude.
You can derive this, and if I had time, I would do this, but I
don't have the time to do that. B is
about 30 microtesla at the
equator.
And it's about 60
microtesla at the poles.
Twice as large at the poles, in other words.
What causes our magnetic field?
It's called the dynamo effect, geomagnetic
dynamo effect to
be more exact. And
it creates convection currents or unstable flow and heat
differentials
that develop charged particles. The charged particles then
generate magnetic fields, which changes a function of time.
So we have three main components. We have the
fluid or kinetic energy due to the rotation of the
Earth. We've got magnetic rocks, which is magnetic
potential energy. And we've got charged particles and
currents,
which are electric potential energy due to the
convective fluid.
Here's what I was talking about earlier.
We do have magnetic pole shifts.
The North Pole right now is moving rapidly towards Russia.
The South Pole is moving towards Australia.
We have had 171 magnetic field reversals
over 71 million years, on average, once
every 415,200 years. The last
one was 780,000 years ago,
so we are due for one any time
soon.
However, the range in the magnetic field
reversals can range from 100,000 years to 50 million
years, so you just don't know.
This is how the magnetic fields have changed between
1590 and 2020, roughly. You can see
that they are constantly in flux.
Magnetic field lines also vary across the Earth.
The blue lines are weak magnetic fields, and you can see
here the weak magnetic fields which cause the South
Atlantic anomaly, where the Van Allen radiation belts
dip into
the lower atmosphere.
And we tend to have a lot of anomalous situations, single
event upsets, and other electronic
anomalies that occur due to that weak magnetic field there.
The red is strong magnetic fields, so
those would not have as much dipping into
the atmosphere.
For Earth-Sun interactions, of course, we talked earlier
before about how the
Sun fuses hydrogen into helium.
And the Sun's magnetic field also interacts with the
Earth's.
Charged particles is trapped in those Van Allen radiation belts.
This is an overview of the solar radiation
spectrum over all of the wavelengths,
and we know, according to Wien's law,
that the max wave output for any body is
2898 over the temperature in
Kelvin.
And that is in micrometers.
Temperature of the Sun is about 15 million degrees Celsius at center,
which is about 27 million degrees Fahrenheit, and
about 500 to 600 degrees Celsius, or 10,000 degrees
Fahrenheit at the surface. The other thing
we know is that we have what's called
atmospheric windows, where
certain frequencies of the EMAG spectrum are
absorbed by our atmosphere. And some good things
about that is that it lets a lot of visible light through
here.
Radio waves are okay, but our harmful
high-energy alpha gamma particles or
gamma rays are not allowed through, which is good.
But if you're trying to design a sensor and you want to design it at
1400 here, about 1400, you would not be
able to get much of that signal through the atmosphere.
Solar energy at any portion, part of our
solar system, inside our solar system is equal to this
equation.
Where Se is the solar output, which
is 1366.1 watts per meter
squared.
Really at the Earth,
it can range from 1371
plus or minus
5 watts per meter squared to
1321 plus or minus 5, depending on
whether we're at apoapsis in the
summer or periapsis in the winter.
This is showing the change in the Earth's magnetic field over
time. This is over, I think, a couple of years,
four years.
You'll notice there's a variation in the amount of radiation
output,
variation in the amount of energy absorbed by Earth's energy,
and the density, temperature, and plasma
output all change pretty
rapidly and regularly.
Our solar cycle follows an 11-year
cycle like this. I showed this before.
And
every 11 years, approximately, the Sun's magnetic fields flip.
Solar max results in giant eruptions.
These can be in the form of solar flares, radiation in charge particles,
very high energy, and coronal mass injections, where the
magnetic field and electric field
releases a lot of energy, and it's kind of
like winding up a whole bunch of rubber bands and releasing them all at
once.
Those create the auroras, communication disruptions,
power, electrical grid outages,
but they are lower energy most of the time than solar
flares. Solar mins were in 1997,
2009, and 2020. Solar max in
2014 was later than expected in 2011
and was supposed to be the largest, but was very small relatively.
And our next cycle, 25, is turning out to be
one of the larger ones.
Solar flares and CMEs. This is an embedded video.
It helps explain the differences pretty well, so I'll go ahead and show
this.
See.
I'm having some issues going to the next page.
Let's see. Let's stop sharing and share again.
Okay, let's go back to our previous
one.
So what is the difference between solar flares and coronal mass
ejections?
Flares consist of X-ray and energy.
They go at the speed of light and take about
a whopping eight minutes to reach the Earth.
CMEs consist of charged particles, protons, and
electrons. They travel about 375 kilometers per
second or 1 million miles per hour,
but that's relatively slow in the scheme of things.
That takes about one to three days to reach the Earth.
Now, this is a chart showing the solar
flares, the magnitude of solar flares.
A and B are the lowest, no big deal.
C might have little to no effect on the Earth, but it could cause a
CME.
M
would cause small radio blackouts, likely to launch a
CME,
and auroras can reach the mid-altitudes, and we've
been experiencing that a lot lately.
X, on the other hand, we get about 10 per year of those,
roughly,
more during solar max, and they definitely cause radio blackouts
and CMEs.
So in summary, we introduced
the course,
looked at the space environment,
Earth-sun interactions. I think this is outdated.
Next week will be
the
bioastronautics lesson.
And that is it for part two.
Next, I want to talk briefly about the design project
because this is going to be a significant part of your grade.
Actually, I think I'll do a separate video on that.
So I'll end this video here, and I'll go to part three about the
design project.